Make guide service centric (#499)
packit/packit.dev: content/docs/guide.md

  since we use [Fedora Copr](src.fedoraproject.org/) for the builds.
  Therefore, please, make sure you read them before configuring the [Packit Service build job](/docs/configuration/#copr_build).
* If you are interested in using [internal instance of the Testing Farm](https://docs.testing-farm.io/general/0.1/services.html#_red_hat_ranch)
  to run your tests in, please, [reach out to us](/#contact), since for this job, an additional approval on our side is needed.
* For retrying the [build](/docs/configuration/#copr_build) and [test](/docs/configuration/#tests) jobs via `/packit build` and `/packit test` pull request comments,
  you need to have write access to the repository or be the author of the pull request.
* Similarly, for retrying the [propose downstream job](/docs/configuration/#propose_downstream) via `/packit propose-downstream` issue comment,
  you need to have write access to the repository.

## 3. Configuration

Packit uses a configuration file to let Packit know what to do, when to do it and how.
As a format, it uses YAML and here are all the valid names:
* `.packit.yaml`
* `.packit.yml`

> * `.packit.json`

Reviewer: I'd stop mentioning the json format so that we [could remove it](https://github.com/packit/research/tree/main/improve-service-processing#problematic-parts-of-the-process) at some point.

Author: Fixed also on the config page.

---
title: Packit Onboarding Guide
weight: 2
aliases: [/packit-service, /packit-as-a-service, /docs/packit-as-a-service]
---

# Packit Onboarding Guide

Let's take a look on how to start using Packit and how to get most of it.

This guide is focused on the service use-case, but Packit is also available as a [CLI tool](https://github.com/packit/packit/blob/main/README.md),
so you can always [try things locally](/docs/cli/) on your own.
Note that testing is not currently supported with the CLI tool.
Unlike the service, CLI uses your own identities when connecting to other service like [Copr](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/)
or [Fedora dist-git](https://src.fedoraproject.org/).

To start using Packit, you need three things:

1. setup integration (so Packit is notified about your activities and can provide feedback)
2. be approved (self-done mapping of your forge identity to FAS identity so we know who you are)
3. configure the wanted features

## 1. Setup Packit integration

> The integration is dependent on the service you use. Here are the supported git-forges:

Author: I'll try to rephrase/restructure this. Thanks.

4. Wait a bit and check `Issues` of the project and after a while there should be
   a new confidential `Packit-Service Authentication` issue with the instructions how to finish the setup.

### Pagure

We have rudimentary support for the Pagure instances since they are used in the downstream workflow.
Packit cannot be set up as a CI (in the same sense as on GitHub or GitLab) on Pagure instances,
since the demand for this feature is not significant.
The differences between GitHub/GitLab and Pagure APIs would result in many workarounds to be implemented, if possible at all.
You can track the progress in the [related issue](https://github.com/packit/packit-service/issues/556) on GitHub.

### Fedora dist-git Pagure

In case you want to use Packit on your downstream repository for downstream jobs
([Koji build](/docs/configuration/#koji_build) and [Bodhi update](/docs/configuration/#bodhi_update)),
you don't need to enable anything.
Just place your config file into the dist-git repository.

## 2. Approval

As a next step, you need to have a valid [Fedora Account System](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Account_System)
account to be able to start using Packit Service.

> We require our new users to have `GitHub Username` field set in the FAS account so that we can automatically

Author: Yes, you are right. I am wondering how to fix that -- we would probably need to create a notification repo on every supported instance to be able to tag/check the account.

So for now, just a manual mapping added by us.

  (Can be used as a next step to Copr build or without build at all.)
* [`production_build`](/docs/configuration/#production_build): A scratch Koji build triggered for the upstream state of project.
* [`propose_downstream`](/docs/configuration/#propose_downstream): For upstream release, Packit prepares a Fedora release.
  (Source is saved to the Lookaside Cache and a dist-git pull-request is created for each configured branch.)
* [`koji_build`](/docs/configuration/#koji_build): A downstream Koji build triggered when there is a new dist-git commit in a given branch.
* [`bodhi_update`](/docs/configuration/#bodhi_update): A Bodhi update created for a successfully finished Koji build.

More about the jobs and how to tweak them can be found on a [configuration page](/docs/configuration#jobs).

### Actions

Actions are a way how to redefine or tweak the Packit's workflows.
These are user-defined commands that can replace a part of Packit's job (e.g. to get version, or to create a tarball)
or are run in a particular step as a hook (with no action run by default).

Take a look at the tables [here](/docs/actions/) to know what actions are available for each job.

> ### How to try that for real

Author: This was aimed to verify the build went well locally and that there is a high chance it will work in the service. At least, that was the goal. (I don't want to focus on using CLI for actual usage, just as a way how to reproduce/debug problems...)

I am still not satisfied with that -- at least, there is that duplicate `packit init` output...

---
title: Packit Onboarding Guide
weight: 2
aliases: [/packit-service, /packit-as-a-service, /docs/packit-as-a-service]
---

# Packit Onboarding Guide

> Let's take a look on how to start using Packit and how to get most of it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's take a look on how to start using Packit and how to get the most out of it.
```

This guide is focused on the service use-case, but Packit is also available as a [CLI tool](https://github.com/packit/packit/blob/main/README.md),
so you can always [try things locally](/docs/cli/) on your own.
Note that running tests in Testing farm infrastructure is not currently supported with the CLI tool.
Unlike the service, CLI uses your own identities when connecting to other service like [Copr](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/)

> or [Fedora dist-git](https://src.fedoraproject.org/).

Author: I mention the `own identities`  a line above but let's make it really explicit so :+1: .

> To start using Packit, you need three things:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To start using Packit, you need to do three things:
```

> 1. setup integration (so Packit is notified about your activities and can provide feedback)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. set up integration (so Packit is notified about your activities and can provide feedback)
```

(setup is a noun, set up a verb)

2. be approved (self-done mapping of your forge identity to FAS identity so we know who you are)
3. configure the wanted features

> ## 1. Setup Packit integration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 1. Set up Packit integration
```

Same as above

   ![Packit GitHub application: Order](/images/guide/guide_github_app_order.png)
4. Install the "Packit-as-a-Service" to repositories of your choice.
   ![Packit GitHub application: Installation](/images/guide/guide_github_app_installation.png)

Once installed, you will see the ["Packit-as-a-Service" GitHub
application](https://github.com/marketplace/packit-as-a-service) in your
project settings. In the left sidebar, click "Integration & services" and you
will see the application displayed there.

### Staging instance

[Packit-as-a-Service-stg](https://github.com/apps/packit-as-a-service-stg) GitHub App
runs the latest code. It can be used to verify latest changes until they get
(every Tuesday) into the [production instance](https://github.com/marketplace/packit-as-a-service).
If you want to enjoy the freshest features and help us with the development,
see more details [here](https://github.com/packit/packit/discussions/1530).

![Packit GitHub application: Staging instance](/images/guide/guide_github_app_stg.png)

### GitLab

GitLab support is mainly experimental and is influenced by the presence of CentOS Stream source-git workflow.

> **We do not verify** the functionality of the GitLab support on the day-to-day basis as we do with the GitHub App.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**We do not verify** the functionality of the GitLab support on a day-to-day basis as we do with the GitHub App.
```

#### How to set up Packit on GitLab

GitLab doesn't have an app functionality and we don't use the [Integrations](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/integrations/overview.html) as it doesn't solve authentication.
To enable Packit, you need to manually configure a webhook.

1. Go to `Settings → Webhooks` and add https://prod.packit.dev/api/webhooks/gitlab or https://stg.packit.dev/api/webhooks/gitlab as the `URL`.
   ![GitLab webhooks](/images/gitlab/webhooks.png)
2. Select `Push events`, `Comments`, `Issues events`, `Merge request events` and `Release events` as the `Triggers`.
   Do not provide `Secret token` yet and click `Add webhook`.
   You should see the created hook at the bottom of the page now.
   ![Setting up webhook](/images/gitlab/set_up_webhook.png)
3. Select `Test` and for example `Merge requests events`.
   At the top of the page appears a red `Hook executed successfully but returned HTTP 401 "X-Gitlab-Token not in request.headers"`.
4. Wait a bit and check `Issues` of the project and after a while there should be
   a new confidential `Packit-Service Authentication` issue with the instructions how to finish the setup.

##### GitLab Pipelines

> With some limitations (but tweakability) you can also use Packit as a GitLab pipeline

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by `but tweakability`?

using the Packit's [CLI](/docs/cli) from the regularly built
[`quay.io/packit/packit` image](https://quay.io/repository/packit/packit).
As you can see in the following example, it's really straightforward and explicit:

```yaml
image: quay.io/packit/packit

srpm_build:
  stage: build
  script:
  - packit srpm
  artifacts:
    paths:
      - "*.src.rpm"
    expire_in: 1 week
```

### Pagure

We have rudimentary support for the Pagure instances since they are used in the downstream workflow.
Packit cannot be set up as a CI (in the same sense as on GitHub or GitLab) on Pagure instances,
since the demand for this feature is not significant.

> The differences between GitHub/GitLab and Pagure APIs would result in many workarounds to be implemented, if possible at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The differences between GitHub/GitLab and Pagure APIs would result in many workarounds having to be implemented, if it would be possible at all.
```

You can track the progress in the [related issue](https://github.com/packit/packit-service/issues/556) on GitHub.

## 2. Approval

As a next step, you need to have a valid [Fedora Account System](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Account_System)
account to be able to start using Packit Service in an upstream project.
For GitHub, we have an automated way of self-approval,
for other instances, [contact us](/#contact) and we will approve you manually.
We require our new users to have `GitHub Username` field set in the FAS account so that we can automatically
check for the match between the `GitHub Username` field in the FAS account and the GitHub account that triggers the verification.
(If you don't know, where to set this value,

> the URL looks like this: `https://accounts.fedoraproject.org/user/{my-fas-username}/settings/profile/#github`.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the URL looks like this: `https://accounts.fedoraproject.org/user/<my-fas-username>/settings/profile/#github`.)
```

Makes it more consistent with the paragraph below that mentions `/packit verify-fas <my-fas-username>`

Author: Good catch!

Besides that:
* If you want to configure builds via Packit,
  your software needs to comply with [Copr guidelines](https://docs.pagure.org/copr.copr/user_documentation.html#what-i-can-build-in-copr)
  since we use [Fedora Copr](src.fedoraproject.org/) for the builds.
  Therefore, please, make sure you read them before configuring the [Packit build job](/docs/configuration/#copr_build).
* If you are interested in using [internal instance of the Testing Farm](https://docs.testing-farm.io/general/0.1/services.html#_red_hat_ranch)
  to run your tests in, please, [reach out to us](/#contact), since for this job, an additional approval on our side is needed.
* For retrying the [build](/docs/configuration/#copr_build) and [test](/docs/configuration/#tests) jobs via `/packit build` and `/packit test` pull request comments,
  you need to have write access to the repository or be the author of the pull request.
* Similarly, for retrying the [propose downstream job](/docs/configuration/#propose_downstream) via `/packit propose-downstream` issue comment,
  you need to have write access to the repository.

## 3. Configuration

> Packit uses a configuration file to let Packit know what to do, when to do it and how.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: `Packit uses a configuration file for specifying what to do, when and how to do it.`

As a format, it uses YAML and here are all the valid names:
* `.packit.yaml`
* `.packit.yml`
* `packit.yaml`
* `packit.yml`

And where do you need to place this config file?
Whenever you need to use Packit -- the concept is easy:
Packit loads the config file from the repository and commit related to the event it reacts to.

> E.g. if Packit works with pull-requests, it takes config from the HEAD commit of the pull-request,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
E.g. if Packit reacts to a pull request, it takes config from the HEAD commit of the pull request,
```

Let's stay consistent, from what I've seen in most of our docs, we use `pull request` without the dash.

if Packit works with releases, the release commit is used
and if Packit works with downstream Koji build,
the respective dist-git commit is used.

You know how to call this file, where to put it, but what should you fill inside?

In the following parts, we will cover some basic concepts used in the Packit config file.
More details can be found on a dedicated [configuration page](/docs/configuration/).

### Basic configuration

You need to provide some basic information to let Packit understand your project and package.
You can use `packit init` command (when [running Packit locally](/docs/cli/)) to get a basic structure.
It will look like this:

```yaml
# See the documentation for more information:
# https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/

> specfile_path: directory.spec

Author: Yes, but not correct. Since we mention this as an example output of the `packit init` I didn't want to provide an incorrect example.

> specfile_path: directory.spec

Reviewer 3: ahaaaa, didn't realize that

yup, a sentence would be nice

# add or remove files that should be synced
files_to_sync:
    - directory.spec
    - .packit.yaml

# name in upstream package repository/registry (e.g. in PyPI)
upstream_package_name: directory
# downstream (Fedora) RPM package name

> downstream_package_name: directory

Author: Same as above. Maybe, I can use `package_name` and add a sentence with the description of the way how we guess it.

> downstream_package_name: directory

Author: Ok, I've updated that.

```

We know that every project is a bit different and Packit can't guess everything
so you can (re)define various other options.
The full list can be found [here](/docs/configuration/#top-level-keys).

#### Version handling

There are a few version-related config options you might need to set:
* [`upstream_tag_template`](/docs/configuration/#upstream_tag_template):
  Specifies a format of upstream tags if it doesn't contain just a version.
* [`get-current-version` action](/docs/actions/):
  Command to get a project version in the current state of the project.

> * [`release_suffix`(/docs/configuration/#release_suffix):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [`release_suffix`](/docs/configuration/#release_suffix):
```

Author: Well spotted!

  Used to influence release field of artifacts provided by Packit.

### Jobs

Packit's feature set is really wide and does not need to to be used as a whole pipeline.

> To let user decide what and when is needed, Packit uses concept of so-called `jobs`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To let user decide what and when should run, Packit uses concept of so-called `jobs`.
```

# See the documentation for more information:
# https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/

specfile_path: directory.spec

# add or remove files that should be synced
files_to_sync:
    - directory.spec
    - .packit.yaml

# name in upstream package repository/registry (e.g. in PyPI)
upstream_package_name: directory
# downstream (Fedora) RPM package name

> downstream_package_name: directory

Reviewer: This is the second time we show the output of `packit init` on this page, but I can't decide which one to remove, so I think I'm fine with it.
So just heads up to make sure you are aware of it.

Author: Yes, I am on the same boat with this. I can't decide..;)

Reviewer 3: Well at this point, folks should already have their packit.yamls prepared, so I'd drop this one.

upstream_package_name: directory
# downstream (Fedora) RPM package name
downstream_package_name: directory
```

Head on to page [configuration]({{< ref "configuration" >}}) to learn more
about the config file.

Packit needs an RPM spec file to build your package. The spec file does not
need to be included in the upstream repo and can be generated on the fly or
downloaded (e.g. from Fedora dist-git).
Please check out our [FAQ]({{< ref "faq" >}}) to read about some other common questions.

You can also read more about the SRPM process
in [the document]({{< ref "cli/srpm" >}}) dedicated to the `srpm` command.

##### Running from the dist-git repository

When you are not allowed or do not want to run packit command from the upstream
git repository, you can run commands from the cloned dist-git repository in the
same way as you do from upstream.  Make sure, that you specify the
`upstream_project_url` in your configuration.

Is your `packit srpm` finally passing? If not, feel free to reach out to us.
If yes, let's proceed to the next level.

#### The project has successful builds inside the service

If a SRPM can be created locally, all should be good in the service as well.

> That's the theory. In practice, your laptop and packit service sandbox

Reviewer 4: do we want to still mention the sandbox in the first place (mainly in relation to packit/packit-service#1583)

Author: I would change it once we change the behaviour for new users.

config file](https://github.com/packit/packit/blob/main/.packit.yaml)
since we try to use all the latest features.

> ## Check Packit works

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Check that Packit works
```

With the configuration above, Packit is able only to build your changes and provide them as RPMs.
Once you create a pull request, Packit builds the code from the

> pull request in COPR repository and reports back COPR build status to the pull request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pull request in Copr repository and reports back Copr build status to the pull request.
```

Again, consistency :)
